Add documentation for custom operation workflow handler (#3280)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/operate/c8y/supported-operations.md

Whenever a new operation file is added to this directory, the supported operations list for that device is updated
by aggregating all the operation file names in that directory and this updated list is sent to the cloud

> using the [SmartRest 114 message](https://cumulocity.com/guides/reference/SmartRest-two/#114).

Reviewer: This change has to be done over all the docs!

> using the [SmartRest 114 message](https://cumulocity.com/guides/reference/SmartRest-two/#114).

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

> using the [SmartRest 114 message](https://cumulocity.com/guides/reference/SmartRest-two/#114).

Reviewer 2: > This change has to be done over all the docs!

True...

> using the [SmartRest 114 message](https://cumulocity.com/guides/reference/SmartRest-two/#114).

Reviewer: This can be done in a separate PR.

For e.g: Cumulocity supports the `c8y_Command` that enables execution of shell commands on the device from the cloud.
The same operation files can be used to define how the mapper should handle these operations when triggered from the cloud.

### Creating new custom operation

> Custom operations can be delivered by SmartRest message or C8Y JSON depending on the content of the operation file. The former is limited to SmartRest input. The latter moves the actual execution of the operation to `tedge-agent` where is executed by the workflow.

Reviewer 2: If the input is JSON over MQTT, user can choose where the operation should be executed. Either by c8y-mapper ("drop 1") or workflow ("drop 2"). So, the current sentence is half accurate. Also, we should say that SmartREST and the "drop 1" are limited to the main device, but the "drop 2" is for all devices.

Author: Resolved in 46b39e8121774672f354a4ec86017bdb715254c3

The filename **MUST** only use alphanumeric and underscore characters, e.g. `A-Z`, `a-z`, `0-9` and `_`. Alternatively, it can have `.template` extension for a master custom operation definition file.
You cannot use a dash "-", or any other characters in the filename, otherwise the custom operation definition will be ignored.
:::

#### Create operation delivered via SmartRest message

An operation file must be created with the name of the operation:

```sh
sudo -u tedge touch /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command
```

... with the definition containing `on_message` field:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command"
[exec]
topic = "c8y/s/ds"
on_message = "511"
command = "/etc/tedge/operations/command"
timeout = 10
```

The mapper is configured to pick up the `c8y_Command` operation message received on `c8y/s/ds` topic with the SmartRest template message prefix `511`. When such a message is received, the operation plugin located at `/etc/tedge/operations/command` would be executed. The operation is configured to `timeout` after 10 seconds, to avoid it from running for too long/forever.

:::note

> The `timeout` that is configured will be in seconds.

Reviewer: I would move this note related to timeouts in the sub-section that details the operation configuration parameters

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

For e.g: Cumulocity supports the `c8y_Command` that enables execution of shell commands on the device from the cloud.
The same operation files can be used to define how the mapper should handle these operations when triggered from the cloud.

### Creating new custom operation

> Custom operations can be delivered by SmartREST message or JSON over MQTT depending on the content of the operation file. The former is limited to SmartREST input. The latter moves the actual execution of the operation to `tedge-agent` where is executed by the workflow.

Reviewer: I still find that this text is missing an introduction.

```suggestion
Custom operations can be triggered on the device by SmartREST message or JSON over MQTT.
In both case the behavior of thin-edge is defined by the operation configuration file that tells to which messages the device must react and how.

* With SmartREST, the SmartREST code of the message determines the operation to execute and  the SmartREST payload is passed unchanged to a script to which the command is delegated.
* With JSON over MQTT the name of operation to execute is given by the JSON payload of the message and the operation is delegated by the agent running on the target device (which can be the main device of a child device ), possibly with some transformation of the JSON payload.
```

Author: Resolved in 46b39e8121774672f354a4ec86017bdb715254c3

:::note
The operation file needs to be readable by %%te%% user - `tedge` - and should have permissions `644`.

> The filename **MUST** follow the Cumulocity naming constraints on operation names: i.e. only use alphanumeric and underscore characters, e.g. `A-Z`, `a-z`, `0-9` and `_`. Alternatively, it can have `.template` extension for a master custom operation definition file.

Reviewer: What is a *a master custom operation definition*?

Author: I admit this name can be confusing and says basically nothing so I changed it to _operation template file_.

exit "$EXIT_CODE"
```

> This script is invoked with the received SmartRest message (`511,DeviceSerial,<shell-command>`).

Reviewer 2: `DeviceSerial` is just an example of a device's external ID.

```suggestion
This script is invoked with the received SmartREST message (`511,<device-xid>,<shell-command>`).
```

but can be restarted directly from the tedge device via some remote restart commands,
the `c8y_Restart` operation file for the child device can be defined to invoke those remote restart commands.

> ##### List of currently supported operations parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Configuration parameters
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

> * `topic` - The topic on which the operation will be executed.

Reviewer: `timeout` is missing. I would add here the above note.

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```sh
sudo -u tedge touch /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command
```

... with the definition containing `on_fragment` field:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command"
[exec]
topic = "c8y/devicecontrol/notifications"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"
command = "/etc/tedge/operations/command ${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"
skip_status_update = false
```

The mapper is configured to pick up the message received on the topic provided in the operation file field `topic` (if the field is not provided, the default topic `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications` will be used). Mapper checks if the received message contains the value of `on_fragment`. Then, the operation plugin located at `/etc/tedge/operations/command` will be executed with the arguments provided in message payload (in this example `${.payload.c8y_Command.text}` will be replaced with `echo helloworld`).

:::info
Users can provide their own custom topic in the operation file:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command"
[exec]
topic = "${.bridge.topic_prefix}/custom/topic"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"
command = "/etc/tedge/operations/command ${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"

> skip_status_update = true

Author: Resolved in 46b39e8121774672f354a4ec86017bdb715254c3

In case those unsupported shell features are present, the syntax that introduce them is interpreted literally.

Be aware that SmartRest payload is always added as the last argument. The command presented above will actually lead to following code execution

```bash
python /etc/tedge/operations/command.py $SMART_REST_PAYLOAD
```
:::

> #### Create operation delivered via C8Y Json

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Create operation delivered via Cumulocity JSON over MQTT
```

P.S. [It seems officially it is **JSON via MQTT**](https://cumulocity.com/docs/smartrest/json-via-mqtt/). However, we always call **JSON over MQTT**.

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

> There are two approaches for handling custom operation via C8Y Json.

Reviewer 2: Replave all **C8Y Json** with **JSON over MQTT**

```suggestion
There are two approaches for handling custom operation via JSON over MQTT.
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

> There are two approaches for handling custom operation via C8Y Json.
> The first one can only be used with main device, while the second one extends it to child devices. Here is a sample of incoming C8Y Json message with custom operation fragment on topic `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications`: 

Reviewer: Before jumping into constraints and approach comparisons, it would be good to tell what are these two alternative approaches!

```suggestion
There are two approaches for handling custom operation via C8Y Json.
- the commands can be processed by a user-provided script
- the commands can be processed by the agent following a user-provided workflow
The first one can only be used with main device, while the second one extends it to child devices. Here is a sample of incoming C8Y Json message with custom operation fragment on topic `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications`: 
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```json
{
  "delivery": {
    "log": [],
    "time": "2024-07-22T10:26:31.457Z",
    "status": "PENDING"
  },
  "agentId":"201802315",
  "creationTime":"2024-09-02T19:56:01.313Z",
  "deviceId":"201802315",
  "id":"1800380",
  "status":"PENDING",
  "c8y_Command":{
    "text":"echo helloworld"
  },
  "description":"Execute command",
  "externalSource":{
    "externalId":"test-device",
    "type":"c8y_Serial"
  }
}
```

The first approach assumes that user will create the operation file with the name of the operation:

```sh
sudo -u tedge touch /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command
```

... with the definition containing `on_fragment` field:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command"
[exec]
topic = "c8y/devicecontrol/notifications"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"
command = "/etc/tedge/operations/command ${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"

> skip_status_update = true

Reviewer 2: I prefer to keep it `false` as it is the default value.

```suggestion
skip_status_update = false
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```

> The mapper is configured to pick up the message received on `topic` provided in the operation file field (if field is skipped, the default topic `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications` will be used). Mapper checks if `on_fragment` matches the one provided in the received message. Then the operation plugin located at `/etc/tedge/operations/command` would be executed with the arguments provided in message payload (in this example `${.payload.c8y_Command.text}` will be replaced with `echo helloworld`).

Reviewer 2: For me it wasn't easy to read this although I know what is the feature. I was trying to improve it. You don't have to take this suggestion.

```suggestion
The mapper is configured to pick up the message received on the topic provided in the operation file field `topic` (if the field is not provided, the default topic `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications` will be used). Mapper checks if the received message contains the value of `on_fragment`. Then, the operation plugin located at `/etc/tedge/operations/command` will be executed with the arguments provided in message payload (in this example `${.payload.c8y_Command.text}` will be replaced with `echo helloworld`).
```

Author: I actually like the change so I used it in a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8. I will still try to find better description.

:::info
Users can provide their own custom topic in the operation file:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command"
[exec]
topic = "${.bridge.topic_prefix}/custom/topic"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"
command = "/etc/tedge/operations/command ${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"
skip_status_update = true
```

Instead of providing `topic_prefix` manually, you can use `${.bridge.topic_prefix}` template to derive it from the bridge config of current cloud instance.

The mapper will automatically subscribe to all custom topic provided in operation file under `topic` field when connecting to the cloud.  
:::

:::note
When `on_fragment` is provided with `on_message`, the mapper will ignore the operation.
:::

> For the second approach, the user is supposed to create a master custom operation definition file with `.template` extension, e.g.:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the second approach, the user has to create a master custom operation definition file with `.template` extension, e.g.:
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command.template"
[exec]
topic = "c8y/devicecontrol/notifications"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"

[exec.workflow]
operation = "command"
input = "${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"
```

To indicate that devices are supporting the operation, the device must publish a command capability message where command name is derived from `exec.workflow.operation`:

```sh
tedge mqtt pub -r 'te/device/<name>///cmd/command' '{}'
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's better to add a note that says the capability message is sent by workflow automatically once the workflow file with the same command name is defined.

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

On receiving, mapper creates a symlink at `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command` (for main device) or `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y/<external_id>/c8y_Command` (for child device) to master template file.

> The Mapper detects the change in the `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y` directory except for `.template` file. When the change is detected, `114` (supported operation) message is sent to c8y.

Reviewer 2: Don't use **c8y** in user guide. Use **Cumulocity** instead.

```suggestion
The mapper detects the change in the `/etc/tedge/operations/c8y` directory except for `.template` file. When the change is detected, the SmartREST `114` (supported operation) message is sent to Cumulocity.
```

Author: Resolved by 7ed51cb0510ca515e1be11862948a7310c0bc597

> After that, C8Y Json message is converted to thin-edge command, preserving all parameters provided in `input` field.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that, the received JSON over MQTT message is converted to %%te%% command, preserving all parameters provided in `input` field.
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```text title="Topic"
te/device/<name>///cmd/command/c8y-mapper-1800380
```

```json5 title="Payload"
{
      "status": "init",
      "text":"echo helloworld",
}
```

:::info
An operation file definition can contain multiple `input` fields:

```toml title="file: /etc/tedge/operations/c8y/c8y_Command.template"
[exec]
topic = "c8y/devicecontrol/notifications"
on_fragment = "c8y_Command"

[exec.workflow]
operation = "command"
input.x = "${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"
input.y = { foo = "bar" }
```

> Conversion to thin-edge command will contain both of them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Conversion to %%te%% command will contain both of them:
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

```text title="Topic"
te/device/<name>///cmd/command/c8y-mapper-1800380
```

```json5 title="Payload"
{
      "status": "init",
      "text":"echo helloworld",
      "foo":"bar",
}
```

> Make sure that provided input is json object, otherwise the operation execution will be skipped.

Reviewer 2: Keep using the official names as much as possible.

```suggestion
Make sure that provided input is JSON object, otherwise the operation execution will be skipped.
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

:::

After conversion, the `tedge-agent` handles custom operation commands using the workflow definition at `/etc/tedge/operations/command.toml`.
Workflow definition must be created by the user.

Here is a sample workflow for `C8y_Command`:

```toml
operation = "command"

[init]
action = "proceed"
on_success = "executing"

[executing]
script = "/etc/tedge/operations/command ${.payload.c8y_Command.text}"
on_success = "successful"

[successful]
action = "cleanup"

[failed]
action = "cleanup"
```

##### List of currently supported operations parameters

> Available in all C8Y Json operation files:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Available in all operation files with the input JSON over MQTT:
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

* `topic` - The topic on which the operation will be executed (by default: `c8y/devicecontrol/notifications`).
* `on_fragment` - Used to check if the mapping file matches the input payload.

> * `skip_status_update` - Optional boolean value that decide whether or not mapper should send operation status update messages (`501`-`503`/`504`-`506`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `skip_status_update` - Optional boolean value that decide whether or not mapper should send operation status update messages (SmartREST messages `501`-`503`/`504`-`506`). The default value is `false`.
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8

> Available only in standard operation file definition:

Reviewer 2: What is "standard operation file"?

Author: I am struggling to find a good name for that. I meant those JSON over MQTT operations which are not templates. I know standard is bad name for that but it supposed to be removed once I find better one.

Author: I changed it to `non-template operation file definition`.

* `command` - The command to execute.

> Available only in master operation file definition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Available only in the template operation file definition:
```

* `workflow.operation` - The command name that will trigger workflow execution.

> * `workflow.input` - The json object input that can be used in the workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `workflow.input` - The JSON object input that can be used in the workflow.
```

Author: Resolved by a267f04581ec93b1644543df4d45e998b590aaa8
